

State statutes, regulations and other rules govern certain aspects of municipal records management, including both public and non-public records. The records classification schedule developed for Municipal governments of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is highly relevant to the City of Boston Data Policy.

Download: [The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Municipal Records Retention Manual] (http://openinnovationframework.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/MA_Municipal_Records_Retention_Manual.pdf)

The Municipal Records Retention Manual (linked above) provides significant guidance on the classification of non-public record series and sets, including arrest records, financial information, human resource data and other municipal records protected under Massachusetts and other law from open disclosure.

For purposes of state records classification and retention compliance,  municipal records generally fall into the following four groups in a scheme suggested by the National Fire Prevention Association (more information on this classification process can be found onpage 173 of the Municipal Records Retention Manual):

> # CLASS DEFINITION EXAMPLE

> ## RECOMMENDED PROTECTION

> ## Class I

> **Vital** Records essential to the continued life of the organization. These records are irreplaceable because they give evidence of legal and financial status, and of the rights and obligations of the organization. Vital records are generally housed in active storage. Accounts receivable, contracts, charters, minutes, payroll, ordinances and resolutions, master personnel listings, all documentation needed to run and read electronic records systems. Fire resistant vaults and safes, dispersal.

> ## Class II

> **Important** Records necessary to the continued life of the organization. While the records can be replaced or reproduced, this can only be done at considerable cost in time and money. These records may be housed in either active or inactive storage. Accounts payable, tax lists, directives. Fire resistant safes, vaults or file rooms.

> ## Class III

> **Useful** Records useful to the continued life of the organization.

> These records may be replaced although their loss would cause temporary inconvenience. Bank statements, correspondence. Fire resistant safes, file rooms, filing devices.

> ## Class IV

> **Non-essential** Records that have no present value and should be destroyed. Requests answered, advertisements, announcements. Use, then destroy.

> Although there is a tendency to equate vital records with records that have historic or archival value, they are not always one and the same. The life span of vital records may be very brief, and may inversely proportional to its importance to the organization. While archival records have enduring interest and historical value, they may not be relevant to the continued functioning of the governmental unit.

> Documentation of computer systems, accounts receivable and insurance policy information are essential to restoring operations after a disaster, even though this information may have a brief usable life or retention period. 


# Additional state rules and guidance relevant to municipal records management:

* The Commonwealth of Massachusetts[Municipal Digitization of Records Form](http://openinnovationframework.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/rmu1e-DigitizationForm.pdf)

* The Commonwealth of Massachusetts [Municiapal Records Inventory](http://openinnovationframework.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/rmuiw-Inventory.pdf)

* The Commonwealth of Massachusetts [State Archives and Records Management Unit](http://openinnovationframework.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Archives_-Records-Management-Unit.pdf)

* Relevant Massachusetts Public Sector [E-Discovery Presentation](http://openinnovationframework.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/E-Discovery-Presentation.pdf)
